..
   Copyright (C) 2008-2021 EDF R&D

   This file is part of SALOME ADAO module.

   This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
   modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public
   License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either
   version 2.1 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.

   This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
   but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
   MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
   Lesser General Public License for more details.

   You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser General Public
   License along with this library; if not, write to the Free Software
   Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307 USA

   See http://www.salome-platform.org/ or email : webmaster.salome@opencascade.com

   Author: Jean-Philippe Argaud, jean-philippe.argaud@edf.fr, EDF R&D

.. _section_methodology:

================================================================================
**[DocT]** Methodology to elaborate a Data Assimilation or Optimization study
================================================================================

This section presents a generic methodology to build a Data Assimilation or
Optimization study. It describes the conceptual steps to build autonomously
this study. It is not dependent of any tool, but the ADAO module allows to set
up efficiently such a study. Notations are the same than the ones used in
:ref:`section_theory`.

Logical procedure for a study
-----------------------------

For a generic Data Assimilation or Optimization study, the main methodological
steps may be as follows, each of which is detailed in the following section:

- :ref:`section_m_step1`
- :ref:`section_m_step2`
- :ref:`section_m_step3`
- :ref:`section_m_step4`
- :ref:`section_m_step5`
- :ref:`section_m_step6`
- :ref:`section_m_step7`

To illustrate these methodological steps from the perspective of a study
applied to an industrial system or problem, the following diagram depicts these
methodological steps in relation to the typical steps in a study:

  .. _meth_steps_in_study:
  .. image:: images/meth_steps_in_study.png
    :align: center
    :width: 75%
  .. centered::
    **The methodological steps required during a study approach applied to an industrial system or problem**

Detailed procedure for a study
------------------------------

.. _section_m_step1:

STEP 1: Specify the resolution of the physical problem and the parameters to adjust
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

An essential knowledge about the studied physical system is the numerical
simulation. It is often available through calculation case(s), and symbolized as
a **simulation operator** (previously included in :math:`H`). A standard
calculation case gathers model hypothesis, numerical implementation, computing
capacities, etc. in order to represent the behavior of the physical system.
Moreover, a calculation case is characterized for example by its computing time
and memory requirements, its data and results sizes, etc. The knowledge of all
these elements is of primary importance in the setup of the data assimilation or
optimization study.

To state correctly the study, one have also to choose the optimization unknowns
in the simulation. Frequently, this can be through physical models of which the
parameters can be adjusted. Moreover, it is always useful to add some knowledge
of sensitivity, for example of the numerical simulation to the parameters that
can be adjusted. More general elements, like stability or regularity of the
simulation with respect to the unknown inputs, are also of great interest.

Technically, optimization methods can require gradient information of the
simulation with respect to unknowns. In this case, explicit gradient code has to
be given, or numerical gradient has to be tuned. Its quality is in relation with
the simulation code stability or regularity, and it has to be checked carefully
before establishing optimization calculations. Specific conditions has to be
used for these checkings.

An **observation operator** is always required, in complement of the simulation
operator. This observation operator, denoted as :math:`H` or included in, has to
convert the numerical simulation outputs into something that is directly
comparable to observations. It is an essential operator, as it is the practical
way to compare simulations and observations. It is usually done by sampling,
projection or integration, of the simulation outputs, but it can be more
complicated. Often, because the observation operator directly follows the
simulation one in simple data assimilation schemes, this observation operator
heavily use the postprocessing and extraction capacities of the simulation code.

.. _section_m_step2:

STEP 2: Specify the criteria for physical results qualification
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Because the studied system are real physical ones, it is of great importance to
express the **physical information that can help to qualify a simulated system
state**. There are two main types of such information that leads to criteria
allowing qualification and quantification of optimization results.

First, coming from mathematical or numerical knowledge, a lot of standard
criteria allow to qualify, relatively or in absolute, the interest of an
optimized state. For example, balance equations or equation closing conditions
are good complementary measures of system state quality. Well chosen criteria
like RMS, RMSE, field extrema, integrals, etc. are also of great interest to
assess optimized state quality.

Second, coming from physical or experimental knowledge, valuable information can
be obtained from the meaning of optimized results. In particular, physical
validity or technical interest can assess of the numerical results of the
optimization.

In order to get helpful information from these two main types of knowledge, it
is recommended, if possible, to build numerical criteria to ease the assessment
of global quality of numerical results.

.. _section_m_step3:

STEP 3: Identify and describe the available observations
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

As the second main source of knowledge of the physical system to be studied, the
**observations, or measures,** denoted as :math:`\mathbf{y}^o`, has to be
properly described. The quality of the measures, their intrinsic errors, their
special features, are worth to know, in order to introduce these information in
the data assimilation or optimization calculations.

The observations have not only to be available, but also to be efficiently
introduced in the numerical framework of calculation or optimization. So the
computing environment giving access to the observations is of great importance
to smooth the effective use of various measures and sources of measures, and to
promote extensive tests using measures. Computing environment covers
availability in database or not, data formats, application interfaces, etc.

.. _section_m_step4:

STEP 4: Specify the DA/Optimization modeling elements (covariances, background...)
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Additional Data Assimilation or Optimization modeling elements allows to
improve information about the fine physical representation of the studied
system.

The *a-priori* knowledge of the system state can be modelized using the
**background**, denoted as :math:`\mathbf{x}^b`, and the **background error
covariance matrix**, denoted as :math:`\mathbf{B}`. These information are
extremely important to complete, in particular in order to obtain meaningful
results from Data Assimilation.

On the other hand, information on observation errors can be used to fill the
**observation error covariance matrix** denoted as :math:`\mathbf{R}`. As for
:math:`\mathbf{B}`, it is recommended to use carefully checked data to fill
these covariance matrices.

In case of dynamic simulation, one has to define also an **evolution operator**
and the associated **evolution error covariance matrix**.

.. _section_m_step5:

STEP 5: Choose the optimization algorithm and its parameters
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Data Assimilation or Optimization requires to solve an optimization problem,
more often modelized as a minimization problem. Depending on the availability of
the gradient of the cost function with respect to the optimization parameters,
recommended class of methods are different. Variational or locally linearized
minimization methods requires this gradient. On the opposite, derivative free
optimization methods doesn't requires this gradient, but present usually a
really higher computational price.

Inside a class of optimization methods, for each method, there is usually a
trade-off between the *"generic capacity of the method"* and its *"particular
performance on a specific problem"*. Most generic methods, as for example
variational minimization using the :ref:`section_ref_algorithm_3DVAR`, present
remarkable numerical properties of efficiency, robustness and reliability, that
leads to recommend it independently of the problem to solve. Moreover, it is
generally difficult to tune the parameters of an optimization method, so the
most robust one is often the one with the less parameters. Finally, at least for
the beginning, it is recommended to use the most generic methods and to change
the less possible the known default parameters.

.. _section_m_step6:

STEP 6: Conduct the optimization calculations and get the results
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

After setting up the Data Assimilation or Optimization study, the calculation
has to be done in an efficient way.

Because optimizing usually involves a lot of elementary physical simulation of
the system, the calculations are often done in Hight Performance Computing (HPC)
environment to reduce the overall user time. Even if the optimization problem is
small, the physical system simulation time can be long, requiring efficient
computing resources. These requirements have to be taken into account early
enough in the study procedure to be satisfied without needing too much effort.

For the same reason of hight computing requirements, it is important to
carefully prepare the outputs of the optimization procedure. The optimal state
is the main required information, but a lot of other special information can be
obtained during or at the end of the optimization process: error evaluations,
intermediary states, quality indicators, etc. All these information, sometimes
requiring additional processing, have to be known and asked at the beginning of
the optimization process.

.. _section_m_step7:

STEP 7: Exploit the results and qualify their physical properties
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Once getting the results, they have to be interpreted in terms of physical and
numerical meaning. Even if the optimization calculation always give a new
optimal state at least as good as the *a priori* one, and most hopefully better,
this optimal state has for example to be checked with respect to the quality
criteria identified when :ref:`section_m_step2`. This can lead to physical,
statistical or numerical studies in order to assess the interest of the optimal
state to represent the physical system.

Besides this analysis that has to be done for each Data Assimilation or
Optimization study, it can be worth to exploit the optimization results as part
of a more complete study of the physical system of interest.

.. _section_methodology_twin:

To test a data assimilation chain: the twin experiments
-------------------------------------------------------

.. index:: single: data assimilation chain
.. index:: single: twin experiments

When developing an assimilation study, the various steps described above form
what is known as a "data assimilation chain". The testing and analysis of this
chain are critical to assess the confidence in the overall approach of the
study.

For this purpose, twin experiments are a classical and very useful tool, which
allows to place oneself in a particular environment where simulations and
expected errors can be controlled. Thus, methodological or numerical
difficulties can be separated and identified, then corrected.

The twin experiment approach can be schematized by the following figure, which
presents the objective and the means of the approach:

  .. _meth_twin_experiments:
  .. image:: images/meth_twin_experiments.png
    :align: center
    :width: 75%
  .. centered::
    **The twin experiment approach to test and analyze a data assimilation (DA) chain**

To simplify, the general approach to using the twin experiments methodology can
be described as follows:

- we choose in an arbitrary way a state called "true", which must be valid for the simulation ;
- we then elaborate "pseudo-observations" from the simulation of the true state, by sampling the simulation in a similar way to real observations ;
- we eventually incorporate noise, either in the true state, or in the pseudo-observations, or in the computational chain, and this in a coherent way with the hypotheses of elaboration of the chain, to see its effect on a specific part of the chain ;
- we then analyze, according to the noise assumptions applied, the ability of the chain to recover the true state or expected differences.

Thus, the methodology of twin experiments, applied several times and with
different controlled hypotheses of noise or error, allows to verify step by
step each component of the complete data assimilation chain.
